Hello everyone. My name is Danni, and my group members are Steven and Ahmed. Today we will be presenting our project, Modeling and Simulating Fan Participation at Large Scale Sporting Events. The project is sponsored by Blue Jays Unlimited at the Johns Hopkins University.
I would like to begin the presentation with an overview of our talk. As you can see on the screen, there are quite a lot of topics to cover. I will first consider the introduction of the project, which will cover some background information about the main concepts behind the project and sponsor information. Next, I will discuss the problem statement and the objectives we plan to achieve. Then, I will hand over the presentation to Ahmed, who will go over the mathematical approach we employed in this project. And finally, Steven will talk about the results we got from the model and simulations, review the timeline and deliverables, and recommend work to be done in the future.
Every one of us has been in an audience at a concert, sports game, seminar, etc at least once in our lifetime. The effect of the audience’s reaction has a large impact on the performance of the speaker, group, or team. At any sporting event, it is reasonable to assume that a loud and supportive home crowd can create the ultimate advantage for their sports team. The crowd can impact the result of a game, and in some cases, quite significantly. Past research have shown that in US professional sports leagues, home teams can win approximately 60% of the time. In US college athletics, the impact is even more significant; home teams can win 66% of the games played. Based on logic and some case studies, we can safely assume that a home crowd can improve the ambiance of a sporting event.
How can a crowd improve the atmosphere and the chance that their home sports team will win the game? They can show support and enhance the atmosphere by “cheering”, which can be chanting the school fight song, doing the wave, or just clapping in general to show approval. Cheering is essential at collegiate sporting events, as it improves the experience of the games for both the teams and the fans.
At Johns Hopkins University, the athletic teams are collectively referred to as the Blue Jays. In the past, the Blue Jays have amassed 47 national championships and 187 conference titles across all sports teams. The Blue Jays have excelled at many different sports, more famously in Men’s Lacrosse, Men’s Swimming, Football, and Baseball. The Men's Lacrosse team has won 44 national championships, most recently in 2007. The Men's Swimming team won 32 conference championships, including a streak of 28 consecutive conference championships from across almost three decades. And finally, the Men's Football and Baseball teams were each conference champions for three consecutive years from 2009-2011. 
Now, you might be wondering who is running behind the scenes to the athletics team. Blue Jays Unlimited is the official booster club responsible for providing financial support for JHU athletics. The group was founded in 1995 by volunteers, consisting of university alumni, friends, associates, and Hopkins staff. Currently, Blue Jays Unlimited has more than 3,000 active participants who are dedicated to supporting and promoting Hopkins athletics.
What has Blue Jays Unlimited done for Hopkins athletes? In the past, the group has raised more than four million dollars in funds, used to improve the experience for student athletes and fans alike. The funds are commonly used to provide financial support for capital projects, athletic scholarships and operational endowments. Examples of past projects include renovation of the Athletic Center and recognition banners for championship teams.
As the official booster club for the Johns Hopkins athletics department, Blue Jays Unlimited is present at nearly all major sporting events. The group often encourage fans to cheer on their home team—the Blue Jays—in a loud and family-friendly manner. Our sponsor is interested in maximizing this fan participation, namely cheering, at sporting events to provide the aforementioned advantage for the Blue Jays: a spirited and supportive home crowd. Blue Jays Unlimited believes it can increasing fan participation in cheering by strategically placing certain student volunteers who help incite cheering—so aptly named “cheer starters”—in the crowd.
As such, our project is to provide our sponsor with what they need. Our official problem statement is as follows: Blue Jays Unlimited wants to know if these “cheer starters” are effective in promoting cheering in a crowd. The group wants to investigate this by using a simple model of fan participation in cheering.
Before we discuss our project, here are some important details to consider. First, we must inspect the structure of Homewood Field, which is the field on which several sports teams perform, such as Football, Lacrosse, and Track. Homewood Field’s capacity is approximately 8500 spectators. As you can see in the image, the long rectangular section of the bleachers highlighted in red in the lower left is usually reserved for Blue Jays’ fans. It can seat approximately half the total capacity, which is about 4,000 spectators.
The home bleachers are usually filled to capacity for all major Hopkins sporting events. Due to the operating capacity of the home bleachers, Blue Jays Unlimited is especially interested in using this advantage to maximize home crowd cheering in the home team bleachers.
Here I will present our official objectives. Our goal is to provide Blue Jays Unlimited with a simple model of fan participation of cheering at the home bleachers on Homewood Field. From the model, we will provide the results from the computer simulation, which will determine of cheer starters are actually effective in promoting cheering. Lastly, if time permits, and the cheer starters are proven to be effective, we will then provide Blue Jays Unlimited with further details about the number of cheer starters and the locations at which cheer starters should be placed in order to achieve maximum cheering.
And now, I will hand the presentation over to Ahmed, who will introduce the mathematical approach we took for our project.

Thank you Danni. 
My name is Ahmed Aly. I will be going over the Mathematical Approach, Simulation procedures and the theoretical equations we used for this model. 
Like any model there are simplifications and assumptions that we made. I would now like to go over the simplifications and assumptions that contributed to this model. 
First, The willingness of a fan in a crowd to cheer depends on many factors. For the purpose of simplicity we have limited these factors to three factors. They are 
1-	The number of people cheering around the fan. This makes sense, after all, we have all had the experience where we find ourselves feeling an urge to clap or cheer when the crowd surrounding us is cheering. 
2-	How long the cheering lasts or the cheering duration. 
3-	The innate support or the amount of personal support each fan has for a team. The innate support level varies with first time watchers, apathetic viewers and enthusiastic fans.
The Second, Simplification is that we will assume that once a fan starts cheering, they will cheer until the the end of the simulation. This eases the task of constructing the simulation, which we will discuss later. 
The Third assumption we make is that we assume that the performance of the sports team is independent of fan cheering or does not influence cheering.  

Next, I would like to move forward and begin to discuss the mathematical approach that we took in building the simulation. 
There are five steps.
The first step is Generating the Innate Support Level for each fan. 
First, we created an arbitrary nxm sized matrix X. Ideally, the matrix X mathematically represents the physical rectangular bleachers for an nm crowd, with each specific element in X representing a fan’s innate support level. The innate support level was generated by sampling a normal random variable. We used a normal distribution because it represents the typical innate support levels of fans. Most fans will lie in the average with outrageous enthusiasts lying at one end and apathetic viewers lying on the other tail. 

As you can see here we have a the normal probability distribution that we used. We set the mean to 10 and the standard deviation to 1 to avoid negative numbers that can complicate the simulation.  

Step 2 of this simulation is determining which Fans are initially cheering.
We start by setting an initial threshold “Tinit” to determine which fans are cheering. We then generated a new nxm matrix X’ to keep track of who is cheering throughout the simulation. Each element in X has a corresponding element in X’. Each element is compared to the initial threshold. If the innate support level of the element is greater than or equal to the initial threshold then the value of 1 is assigned to the corresponding element in X’. If the innate level is less than the threshold then a value of zero is assigned. 
The Value one signifies cheering while the value of zero means not cheering.

We move on to the next step which where things start to get exciting and interesting. For this step we begin to include the influence of the surrounding fans. 
We start by creating another nxm matrix S. S stores the number of cheering people surrounding a specific fan or element. 
Each element in S corresponds to an element in X and X’. 
Next, we define an arbitrary time interval r to include the influence of the cheering duration. Typically in r is around 3-5 seconds. We then generate another matrix Y nxm with each element corresponding to an element in X, S and X’. We assign each element in Y a value by following the theoretical equation shown below. 
Basically what we do is we take the innate support level of a specific fan then multiply it by the number of people directly cheering next that specific fan and we add the round number r. 

We see from this equation that the likelihood of a fan to start cheering increases with thw number of surround people cheer and the longer the time they cheer goes on.

Step 4 is updating the matrices and comparing Y values to the absolute threshold. 
Basically, we compare each element in Y with an arbitrary absolute threshold that we set. 
If the Y value is greater than or equal to the absolute threshold then we assign the value 1 to the corresponding X’ element. If the Y value is less than the threshold then the value of zero remains assigned to the corresponding X’ element. As before 1 means cheering and zero means not cheering. 

The last step is repeating the simulation until the total number or rounds capital R is met. 
So really quickly: 
1-	 We setup the matrices with the appropriate initial conditions 
2-	 We check to see if there are any new fans that start to cheer
3-	We update the matrices S,X’ and Y
4-	We repeat this process for R rounds.
I will now give the microphone to Steven, who will discuss the results and conclusions. 

Thank you Ahmed. 
Before I go into any further details about the results we obtained from our model, I first want to discuss the final parameter values that we choose to use in our model. First off, due to computational limits, we could not simulate a crowd of 4000 fans. Instead we downsized our crowd size to 2000 fans and choose to simulate a crowd of 20 by 100 fans. The matrix produced by simulating 20 by 100 fans is long and rectangular and thus similar in shape to the home team bleachers at Homewood Field. We also decided to set our initial threshold at 11 and the absolute threshold at 46. We decided upon these values after doing some extensive testing where we tried different combinations of values for the initial threshold and absolute threshold. We found these values we selected to be appropriate since when the initial threshold was set below 11, we thought that there were too many fans that were initially cheering, and when the initial threshold was greater than 11, there weren’t enough initially cheering fans. Similarly, when the absolute threshold was lower than 46, we felt that too high of a percentage of fans ended up cheering to be realistic and when the absolute threshold was higher than 46, not a great enough percentage of fans ended up cheering to be realistic. For example when the initial threshold was set to 10 or lower, more than 50% of the crowd was initially cheering and almost 100% of the crowd ended up cheering after 10 rounds. We felt that this was not realistic. Another example is when we set the absolute threshold to above 60. When this was done, the simulation tended to stall, meaning that there was little to no increase in cheering after a certain round, and we felt this was also unrealistic. We also decided to do 10 rounds per simulation. The last parameter shown is the number of cheer starters which we denote CS. This is the parameter that we varied and experimented with to generate our results.
Now, I’d like to discuss the Monte Carlo Simulation we performed using our simulation. For a given CS value, the CS cheer starters were randomly placed in crowd. The crowd simulation was run and the final percentage of cheering fans after 10 rounds was computed as previously described. We repeated this 1000 times for each CS value. For each of the 1000 trials we recorded the final percentage of cheering fans after the 10 rounds. We then averaged these percentages over all 1000 trials to come up with the average final percentage of cheering fans for that given CS value. We then repeated this for CS values in the range of 1 to 50. The average final percentage of cheering fans for each CS value was then compared to the average final percentage of cheering fans when there were zero cheer starters, using a simple t-test.

The main result we came up with was that when there are 39 or more cheer starters, there is a statistically significant increase in cheering. More specifically, when there are 39 or more cheer starters, there is a statistically significant increase in the average final percentage of cheering fans where the p-value of the t-test is less than 0.05. Another observation we made was that if the number of cheer starters is increased further, the average final percentage of cheering fans also increases. This was expected. You would expect that if you put more cheer starters sin the crowd, more people should end up cheering, and this is consistent with what we observed with our model.

Here you can see a plot of the average final percentage of cheering fans versus the number of cheer starters. The data on this plot is averaged over the 1000 trials we did for each CS value. We can also observe a positive linear relationship between the average final percentage of cheering fans and the number of cheer starters. As I previously said, as the number of cheer starters increases so does the average final percentage of cheering fans. 

Here are some actual values from the plot. As you can see when there are 0 cheer starters, approximately 63% of the crowd ends up cheering. When we have 39 cheer starters, around 73% of the crowd ends up cheering. Also as I mentioned before, 39 is the first cheer starter number that produces a statistically significant increase in cheering where the p-value is less than 5%.

Here you can see a plot of the percent of the crowd cheering in each round for several CS values. Note that the data in this plot is also averaged across 1000 trials for each CS value. The lowest line in the plot is when CS=0. The 2nd to top line in this plot is when CS=39. 

These are actual values from the plot. At round 1, when CS=0, approximately 16% of the crowd is initially cheering. After 10 rounds this percentage grows to around 63% as I said before. When CS=39, approximately 17.5% of the crowd is initially cheering and that this percentage grows to around 72% after 10 rounds. Thus after 10 rounds there is approximately a 10% difference in the final percentage of cheering fans between when there are 0 cheer starters and when there are 39 cheer starters.

Here you can see a method which we devised to visualize the cheering crowd. To begin with, the left image is when there are 0 cheer starters. The round number is labeled on the left hand side of each image. In these images, white represents cheering, and the white horizontal bars separate rounds. As you can see, the amount of cheering increases as the rounds progress. The image on the right is the same type of image except when there are 39 cheer starters added. As you can again see, cheering increases as the rounds progress. Since there is only an approximate 10% difference between round 10 when CS=0 and round 10 when CS=39, you can only see an approximate 10% increase in the amount of white on the right image as compared to the left image.

Now I’d like to present a checklist of the deliverables, both from our team to our sponsor and from our sponsor to us. The first thing to note is that, like we originally said we would do, our model was coded on Matlab R2009b and all computations were performed on an Intel Core I7 Desktop PC.

Here is a list of the deliverables from our team to our sponsor. Our main deliverable was a Matlab R2009b and R combination package with test scripts that could be used to reproduce our numerical and simulation test results. We are happy to say that we are in the final stages of completing this deliverable. Another deliverable we promised was technical reports and presentations summarizing our work. We are also in the finals stages of completing this deliverable. We had one time-permitting deliverable which was to generate a list a patterns of cheer starter setups which maximized fan cheering. Unfortunately, we don’t think that we will be able to complete this deliverable due to time constraints. However we are recommending that this deliverable could be done as future research.

Here is a list of deliverables from our sponsor to our team and that was only to give timely responses to inquiries. We are happy to say that all of our questions have been answered in a timely manner and as such our sponsor has fulfilled their deliverable.

Here is a timeline of our remaining milestones. We must submit our final presentation by November 30th, and need to finish by December 10th. We must also finalize our deliverables by December 20th.

Here you can see the work that remains to be done to complete our project. We must finalize our Matlab/R combination package and also finish the final report and deliverables.

In terms of recommendations for future research, it would be interesting to see if this model could be applied to other social events such as concerts, college lectures, or theaters where there are large crowds and applause is relevant. As I said before, we are also recommending our time-permitting deliverable be done as future research, and that was to attempt to find patterns in cheer starter placements which maximize cheering.

Here you can see a list of our references.

Before we end this discussion, we would like to thank Dr. Lee for his support and academic guidance as well as our classmates for their support.

Thank you for your attention. I’d now like to open the floor to any questions you may have about our project.

